Added documentation for 15-pin and 22-pin Camera Connectors. #3155 (#4105)
raspberrypi/documentation: documentation/asciidoc/accessories/camera/camera_hardware.adoc

* Camera Module v3 https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/camera/camera-module-3-schematics.pdf[PDF]
* HQ Camera Module https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/hq-camera/hq-camera-schematics.pdf[PDF]

==== Camera Connector Pinout (15-Pin)

This is the pinout of the 15-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on flagship Raspberry Pi models prior to the Raspberry Pi 5.

> The connector type is an Amphenol SFW15R-2STE1LF or a compatible equivalent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connector is compatible with Amphenol SFW15R-2STE1LF.
```

Signal direction is specified from the perspective of the Raspberry Pi.

> The I^2^C lines (SCL and SDA) are pulled up to 3.3V on the Raspberry Pi board.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The I2C lines (SCL and SDA) are pulled up to 3.3 V on the Raspberry Pi board.
```

> The I^2^C lines (SCL and SDA) are pulled up to 3.3V on the Raspberry Pi board.

Reviewer 2: Wikipedia lists the no-superscript version as an acceptable alias. Our style guide is determined that that's the version we use "I2C - Inter-Integrated Circuit, used for peripherals on Raspberry Pi; use I2C (no superscript) unless there's a particular reason for using I^2^C".
Given this, I agree with Jeunese on this one.

The function and direction of the GPIO lines depend on the specific Camera Module in use. Typically, CAM_IO0 is used as an active-high power enable.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

NOTE: Which end is pin 1 on an FPC connector depends on your source and destination hardware, and whether your cable has contacts on the top, the bottom, or both the top and bottom.

```

|===
| Pin     | Name        | Description                   | Direction / Type

| 1       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 2       | CAM_DN0     | D-PHY lane 0 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
| 3       | CAM_DP0     | D-PHY lane 0 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 4       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 5       | CAM_DN1     | D-PHY lane 1 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
| 6       | CAM_DP1     | D-PHY lane 1 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 7       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 8       | CAM_CN      | D-PHY Clock (negative)        | Input, D-PHY
| 9       | CAM_CP      | D-PHY Clock (positive)        | Input, D-PHY
|10       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|11       | CAM_IO0     | GPIO (e.g. Power-Enable)      | Bidirectional, 3.3V
|12       | CAM_IO1     | GPIO (e.g. Clock, LED)        | Bidirectional, 3.3V
|13       | SCL         | I^2^C Clock                   | Output, 3.3V
|14       | SDA         | I^2^C Data                    | Bidirectional, 3.3V

> |15       | 3V3         | 3.3V Supply                   | Output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|15       | 3V3         | 3.3 V Supply                   | Output
```

|===

==== Camera Connector Pinout (22-Pin)

This is the pinout of the 22-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on the Raspberry Pi Zero series, the Compute Module IO boards, and flagship models since the Raspberry Pi 5.
The connector is compatible with Amphenol F32Q-1A7H1-11022.

Direction is given from the perspective of the Raspberry Pi.
The I2C lines (SCL and SDA) are pulled up to 3.3 V on the Raspberry Pi board.

> The function and direction of the GPIO lines depend on the specific Camera Module in use. Typically, CAM_IO0 is used as an active-high power enable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function and direction of the GPIO lines depend on the specific Camera Module in use. Typically, CAM_IO0 is used as an active-high power enable. Some products do not include CAM_IO1.
```

|===

> | Pin No. | Name        | Description                   | Direction / Type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Pin     | Name        | Description                   | Direction / Type
```

| 3       | CAM_DP0     | D-PHY lane 0 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 4       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 5       | CAM_DN1     | D-PHY lane 1 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
| 6       | CAM_DP1     | D-PHY lane 1 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 7       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 8       | CAM_CN      | D-PHY Clock (negative)        | Input, D-PHY
| 9       | CAM_CP      | D-PHY Clock (positive)        | Input, D-PHY
|10       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|11       | CAM_DN2     | D-PHY lane 2 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
|12       | CAM_DP2     | D-PHY lane 2 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
|13       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|14       | CAM_DN3     | D-PHY lane 3 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
|15       | CAM_DP3     | D-PHY lane 3 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
|16       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|17       | CAM_IO0     | GPIO (e.g. Power-Enable)      | Bidirectional, 3.3V
|18       | CAM_IO1     | GPIO (e.g. Clock, LED)        | Bidirectional, 3.3V
|19       | GND         | -                             | Ground

> |20       | SCL         | I^2^C Clock                   | Output, 3.3V

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|20       | SCL         | I2C Clock                   | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
```

> |21       | SDA         | I^2^C Data                    | Bidirectional, 3.3V

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|21       | SDA         | I2C Data                      | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
```

* Camera Module v3 https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/camera/camera-module-3-schematics.pdf[PDF]
* HQ Camera Module https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/hq-camera/hq-camera-schematics.pdf[PDF]

==== Camera Connector Pinning (15-Pin)

> This is the pinout of the 15-Pin Raspberry Pi CSI camera connector as used in the classical Rasberry Pi products. The connector is an Amphenol SFW15R-2STE1LF or compatible type.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if "classical" is the right phrasing here. Looking at the wording on  https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html#introduction perhaps it ought to be something like "flagship Raspberry Pi models before the Raspberry Pi 5".

> NOTE: A Camera Module is recommended to have reversed pinning. Pin 1 of the Rasberry Pi connects to Pin 15 of the Camera Module.

Reviewer: "recommended" seems like an odd choice of words here. Surely the "pinning" either does need to be reversed, or doesn't need to be reversed ??

Author: Well it needs to be reversed. That is exactly the thing here.
i.e. a camera module will have GND on pin 15 and 3V3 on pin 1. Unless it uses a cable which mirrors/reverses the pins. However that is not very common, I guess.

Think of this visually. Take two connectors and connect them via an FFC, then the right connector will be 180° rotated. I.e. pin 1 of the left connector "lands" on pin 15 of the right connector. That is not necassarily obvious, hence the note.

Author: After re-reading your comment I agree and rephrased this as follows
`A Camera Module shall have reversed pinout to support Type A / Type 1 FFC cables.`

Reviewer: Urgh. To me that sounds too similar to the language you'd find in an internet RFC, and IMO that's not the style that we use in the Raspberry Pi documentation.

Author: I come from an IEEE 802.3 background, so you are not wrong 😃

Author: I reworked this entirely. 

`NOTE: Most official Camera Modules have a reversed pinout to accommodate https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/camera-cable/[22-pin Type A / Type 1 FFC cables]. This means Pin 1 on the Raspberry Pi connects to Pin 22 on the Camera Module, and vice versa.`

> Direction is specified from the perspective of the Rasberry Pi.

Reviewer: You've misspelled "Raspberry" in multiple places :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:

|===
| Pin No. | Name        | Description                   | Direction / Type

| 1       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 2       | CAM_DN0     | D-PHY lane 0                  | Input, D-PHY
| 3       | CAM_DP0     | D-PHY lane 0                  | Input, D-PHY
| 4       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 5       | CAM_DN1     | D-PHY lane 1                  | Input, D-PHY
| 6       | CAM_DP1     | D-PHY lane 1                  | Input, D-PHY
| 7       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 8       | CAM_CN      | D-PHY Clock                   | Input, D-PHY
| 9       | CAM_CP      | D-PHY Clock                   | Input, D-PHY
|10       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|11       | CAM_IO0     | GPIO (e.g. Power-Enable)      | Bidir, 3.3V
|12       | CAM_IO1     | GPIO (e.g. Clock, LED)        | Bidir, 3.3V
|13       | SCL         | I2C Clock                     | Output, 3.3V
|14       | SDA         | I2C Data                      | Bidir, 3.3V
|15       | 3V3         | 3.3V Supply                   | Voltage Output
|===

==== Camera Connector Pinning (22-Pin)

> This is the pinout of the Raspberry 22-Pin Pi CSI camera connector as used on the Pi ZERO-W and CM5IO board. The connector is an Amphenol F32Q-1A7H1-11022 or compatible type.

Reviewer: Also (IIRC) Zero 2W, CMIO1, CMIO3 and CMIO4. See https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html#introduction and https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/

Author: I think I will remove this statement entirely. This would need to be maintained if new products are released and  such things tend to get overlooked

Reviewer: Or you could attempt to make the phrasing generic with something like "The Raspberry Pi Zero series, the Compute Module IO boards, and flagship models since the Raspberry Pi 5".

> NOTE: A Camera Module shall have reversed pinout to support Type A / Type 1 FFC cables. Pin 1 of the Raspberry Pi connects to Pin 22 of the Camera Module.

Reviewer: Might be nice to put in a link to https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/camera-cable/ here :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: I only added that link to the 22-pin section, is there a similar product for the 15-pin from the official webpage? Then i can add that to the 15-pin section.

Reviewer: IIRC there's not an official 15-pin to 15-pin camera cable, because all of the Raspberry Pi Camera modules get supplied with a 15-pin cable. (and as it's only a "straight-through" FFC cable, third-party alternatives are easily available)

Author: I dropped the NOTE altogether.

* Camera Module v3 https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/camera/camera-module-3-schematics.pdf[PDF]
* HQ Camera Module https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/hq-camera/hq-camera-schematics.pdf[PDF]

==== Camera Connector Pinout (15-Pin)

This is the pinout of the 15-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on flagship Raspberry Pi models prior to the Raspberry Pi 5.
The connector is compatible with Amphenol SFW15R-2STE1LF.

Signal direction is specified from the perspective of the Raspberry Pi.
The I2C lines (SCL and SDA) are pulled up to 3.3 V on the Raspberry Pi board.

> The function and direction of the GPIO lines depend on the specific Camera Module in use. Typically, CAM_IO0 is used as an active-high power enable. Some products do not include CAM_IO1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The function and direction of the GPIO lines depend on the specific Camera Module in use. Typically, `CAM_IO0` is used as an active-high power enable. Some products don't include `CAM_IO1`.
```

|===
| Pin     | Name        | Description                   | Direction / Type

| 1       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 2       | CAM_DN0     | D-PHY lane 0 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
| 3       | CAM_DP0     | D-PHY lane 0 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 4       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 5       | CAM_DN1     | D-PHY lane 1 (negative)       | Input, D-PHY
| 6       | CAM_DP1     | D-PHY lane 1 (positive)       | Input, D-PHY
| 7       | GND         | -                             | Ground
| 8       | CAM_CN      | D-PHY Clock (negative)        | Input, D-PHY
| 9       | CAM_CP      | D-PHY Clock (positive)        | Input, D-PHY
|10       | GND         | -                             | Ground
|11       | CAM_IO0     | GPIO (for example, Power-Enable)  | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
|12       | CAM_IO1     | GPIO (for example, Clock, LED) | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
|13       | SCL         | I2C Clock                     | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
|14       | SDA         | I2C Data                    | Bidirectional, 3.3 V
|15       | 3V3         | 3.3 V Supply                   | Output
|===

==== Camera Connector Pinout (22-Pin)

> This is the pinout of the 22-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on the Raspberry Pi Zero series, the Compute Module IO boards, and flagship models since the Raspberry Pi 5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the pinout of the 22-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on the Raspberry Pi Zero series, the Compute Module IO boards, and flagship models since Raspberry Pi 5.
```

This is the pinout of the 15-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on flagship Raspberry Pi models prior to the Raspberry Pi 5.
The connector type is an Amphenol SFW15R-2STE1LF or a compatible equivalent.

> NOTE: Camera Modules that use the same 15-pin connector feature a reversed pinout to support 15-pin Type A / Type 1 FFC cables.

Reviewer: Thanks for the update, but IMHO this still needs additional tweaks. As I mentioned earlier, **all** of the official Raspberry Pi Camera Modules feature a 15-pin CSI connector, and so it doesn't make sense to talk about "Camera Modules that use...". The official Raspberry Pi documentation only covers the official Raspberry Pi accessories :slightly_smiling_face:  (If any 3rd-party products work differently, it's up to that 3rd-party to document how to use their product safely with a Raspberry Pi)

I think this ought to be something like "NOTE: The 15-pin connector on the Raspberry Pi features a reversed pinout to the 15-pin connector on the Raspberry Pi Camera Modules."

Author: Ok that is something i was not aware of. I wanted to phrase this as generic as possible so that users of the Pi are aware what is going on and open source users/vendors are able to design their own modules which are interoperable. I was very confused when i ran across (obviously non-Pi) modules that on first glance looked incompatible but later turned out to use different connector styles.

Reviewer: Sorry to take "a hard line" but if the official Raspberry Pi documentation made _any_ attempt to list / document / explain compatibility with 3rd-party hardware / accessories, it'd be a never-ending game of catch up :sweat_smile:  Which is why we've taken the policy we have.

> NOTE: Most official Camera Modules use the same 15-pin connector but feature a reversed pinout to support 15-pin Type A / Type 1 FFC cables.

Reviewer: "Most"?? I don't think there's an official camera module (see https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/#cameras-and-displays ) that _doesn't_ have a 15-pin connector?

This is the pinout of the 22-pin Camera Serial Interface (CSI) connector used on the Raspberry Pi Zero series, the Compute Module IO boards, and flagship models since the Raspberry Pi 5.
The connector type is an Amphenol F32Q-1A7H1-11022 or a compatible equivalent.

> NOTE: Camera Modules that use the same 22-pin connector feature a reversed pinout to accommodate https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/camera-cable/[22-pin Type A / Type 1 FFC cables].

Reviewer: See above comment - we don't make any camera modules with a 22-pin connector, it's he Pi itself that has the 22-pin connector.

Author: I am not saying that you make such modules. The text just says that if there was one, it had flipped pinning.

Reviewer: Again, it's up to 3rd-parties to document their hardware and which models of Raspberry Pi it works with, not us.

> As a result, Pin 1 on the Raspberry Pi connects to Pin 22 on the camera module, and vice versa.

Reviewer: Note that (AFAIK) all of our camera modules are 15-pin, and it's only the "special cable" (which I mentioned previously) that connects a 15-pin camera module to the 22-pin CSI connector on Pi 5 or Pi Zero.

Author: I am not too familiar which cameras are made by which manufacturer (Raspi, Arducam, etc). In case some statements are wrong or partially incorrect, it would be appreciated if you could propose a better phrasing, otherwise we proabbaly keep on iterating for some time.

The key take-aways that i would like to have included in my CR are these:
* Pinning may flip, depending what exact cable and connector type is used.
* Voltage level of LVCMOS IOs
* Where are Pull-Ups/Downs placed (on cam module vs on raspi)

Reviewer: > otherwise we proabbaly keep on iterating for some time.

Sorry for all the back-and-forth, but I like to ensure that the official Raspberry Pi documentation is correct! :grinning: 

> * Pinning may flip, depending what exact cable and connector type is used.

Understood, but this is only an issue for people using 3rd-party cables or camera modules.

> * Voltage level of LVCMOS IOs
> * Where are Pull-Ups/Downs placed (on cam module vs on raspi)

These are questions that only @dp111 can answer.

Author: > Understood, but this is only an issue for people using 3rd-party cables or camera modules.

Or creating a 3rd-party module of some form that connects to this interface. Is that out of scope of this documenation?

> When using third-party connectors or extension boards, be cautious - some connectors expose the opposite side of the FFC cable, effectively reversing the pin order again.

Reviewer: As it's the cable that converts from the 22-pin connector on the Raspberry Pi to the 15-pin connector on the Camera Module, IMHO this also ought to emphasise that any 3rd-party connectors / extension boards / cables also need to be compatible with https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/camera-cable/
For example you can't use https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/display-cable/ to connect a Camera Module to a Pi 5, and I've seen at least one report of somebody trying to use a 3rd-party 22-pin -> 15-pin CSI cable which didn't work because it was wired differently to the official Raspberry Pi Camera Cable.

Author: > For example you can't use https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/display-cable/ to connect a Camera Module to a Pi 5, and I've seen at least one report of somebody trying to use a 3rd-party 22-pin -> 15-pin CSI cable which didn't work because it was wired differently to the official Raspberry Pi Camera Cable.

I think this is a good example. The documenation is not enabling people to judge what fits together and what doesnt. My original idea was to give some technical reasoning to enable people.  Your approach is to state that "inside the Raspberry Pi Ecosusystem it us plug-and-play" - I guess that is fair. Let me remove this NOTE altogether then.

Reviewer: > Your approach is to state that "inside the Raspberry Pi Ecosusystem it us plug-and-play" - I guess that is fair.

Yeah; we're not sticking our heads in the sand and trying to pretend that 3rd-party products don't exist - they obviously do and they're a large part of the Raspberry Pi ecosystem.
We simply can't anticipate what any of those 3rd-party products do or don't do though, or how they might connect to a Raspberry Pi (which is why I'm reluctant to mention them in the official documentation), all we can do is document the available interfaces as clearly as possible.
